a wonderful new set of offerings you
talk about the need for international
borders to reopen
how long do you think the recovery for
the sector will be
look i think this is a four to five year
recovery period being realistic
there are some major events scheduled
for 2023 and i think that's probably our
big kickoff point for a wider
international marketplace
the government of both state and federal
levels have had help
at their you know forefront of their
minds in terms of this process as they
absolutely should and of course the
industry completely backs that
we do think now though it's the right
time to start thinking very carefully
about this process
of borders opening and closing and
opening and closing and what the
appropriate triggers might be you said
2023 is that when you expect
international travel to return to
australia
i think we'll see a staggered approach
to international travel we'll see
probably in the second half of next year
some of the larger asian destinations
we may see fiji and southern the island
nations and uh potentially new zealand
in the very early part of next year
but it is going to take time and i i'm
not certain when we can predict in terms
of the us
and europe but it's going to take a
significant amount of time
shares in treasury wine estates were
placed in a trading halt on friday
following news china will slap tariffs
on australian wine
the 1 billion export industry is the
latest target of escalating trade
tensions
china's commerce ministry says importers
of australian wine will need to pay
a temporary anti-dumping security
deposit
abc china correspondent bill bertels
joined me
bill these tariffs are a pretty
significant percentage
how much damage is this going to cause
to the australian export sector
well rachel it will devastate
australia's 1.26 billion dollars worth
of
wine sales annually to china but it
might not completely
wipe them out the indications from wine
industry
figures today is that even though
a 160 to 200 or 212 percent
tariff is a brutal blow to
australian wine in the chinese market it
doesn't
mean that australian wine can't compete
at all it will just be incredibly
difficult now
to compete against french wine
californian wine chilean wine south
african wine but
nonetheless it's it's perhaps not quite
the same
as the tariffs on bali which effectively
wiped
out the trade there is some optimism
within the industry that they can still
sell some wine into china
in one way or another but it certainly
is going to
drop off in a big way bill the
investigation out of china is still
ongoing
do you think this will be the full
extent of the ramifications
of that inquiry i do suspect
that the real reason is political that
this is
most likely to do with the
australia-china bilateral relationship
just like all these various trade
strikes on different sectors that we've
seen in recent months
and whether or not the final conclusion
of the inquiry will end up placing
the same level of tariff on australian
wine after it finishes next year
hard to say but it's probably going to
have more to do
with the nature of the political
relationship at that time
rather than being based on what
conclusions
are being presented at this point
[Music]
as restrictions lift employers will need
to tackle the big question
do workers have to return to the office
there are financial productivity and
engagement pluses and minuses for
workforces at home
some employers are trying to find the
best of both worlds
permanently post-covered here's emilia
terzon again
madeleine lucas has loved the perks of
working from home
getting to cook your own lunch when you
feel like it's setting your own hours
being able to exercise before covert the
white collar worker was commuting more
than two hours a day from her country
home to the office in melbourne
not commuting anymore is actually heaven
but heaven
has a downside i miss the people so much
so much we are all really close at our
office
as restrictions ease madeleine's
employer is giving her
the best of both worlds two days a week
in the office
and three at home i feel so fortunate
to be able to do that two days working
in the office is the general consensus
that seems to be what the majority of us
want and the agreement is that that time
would be used for
our team beating bonding culture work
you know having deep connective time
strategic time together long term it's
definitely going to be a hybrid mix
hybrid has become a corporate
catchphrase during covert 19.
major employers say covert has proven
just how flexible a workforce can be
i think it's had a fundamental mindset
shift
in the way that leaders manage their
outcomes and the fact that they don't
have to be watching people
micromanaging people to get their work
done the major bank westpac
wants half of its workforce that's 20
people to take up the hybrid model even
after a vaccine is available
we really want our people to feel that
they have that flexibility to work
across multiple work hubs so whether
that's the office
whether that is in their home or whether
that's even leveraging some of our other
work sites like our operations centres
medibank is also going hybrid engagement
levels have been the highest they've
been we've seen really high levels of
team connection
high levels of productivity and we've
seen reduction in absenteeism and
turnover
this will involve a re-jig of floor
plans so the desks they can come up but
for now
no permanent closure of offices we have
redefined
the purpose of the office to really be
around a place to go to for people to
connect to collaborate and to
concentrate
rather than the place to go to just
because it's monday and it's not just
corporates this melbourne research
facility is going to allow
hundreds of scientists to do some of
their work from home
permanently the way the staff and the
students here have adapted
to covert has been fantastic
and i think the flexibility will will
end up being great
from a scientific productivity viewpoint
but also
fantastic from a work-life balance
viewpoint it's clear that a long-term
shift is happening but many employers
still haven't worked out who'll pay for
all the costs of working from home
contracts and enterprise agreements
might have to be renegotiated
we're working through all of that at the
moment we haven't made any
final decisions for some workers that's
enough
for now the hybrid model really reflects
what is needed for the world as it is
now
and i think that that's a really great
thing it's a real treat
to be able to spend time in a beautiful
office and time
in your beautiful home turns out for
some being forced to stay home
wasn't too bad after all
the victorian government plans to rack
up record levels of debt
shoveling cash into the covert-stricken
economy as it handed down its budget
this week spending on infrastructure
schools and
tax concessions among others will take
debt to 155 billion dollars
within three years or about a third of
victoria's annual output
daniel ziffer joined elise morgan after
the budget lock-up
a substantial hit to the victorian
economy it contracted 4
last year essentially 16 billion dollars
wiped off the table
the government's tax take for example
was down 10
things like gambling uh land tax stamp
duty
those kind of things just really fell
off as people were forced to stay home
to stop the spread of coronavirus
you know timing is everything and in
politics
amazing day today victoria exited its
final coronavirus patient from hospital
and the government got out essentially a
fire hose of cash
to douse the flames of recession and try
and create some green shoots in the
economy
yes in incredible figures coming out of
the victorian government about what
over the over the forward estimates 150
billion dollars in spending coming up 50
billion in the short
term but essentially it seems to be the
opposite of what we saw from the federal
budget which was very much
i put the incentives out there for
business wants to hire
there's some incentives there this is
very much trying to
push demand straight into the economy
to then light up business well i guess
the aim with the federal government was
that that money would trickle down
the victorian government has gone very
direct you know i call it
fire hose economics they really aren't
just trying to get the cash out there
as fast as they can 20 billion dollars a
year for the next
four years for infrastructure train
tunnels
hospitals contemporary art museums
you know huge mega projects as well as
really small projects
dotted out through the community and
that's before we get to kind of
social infrastructure they're spending
hundreds of millions of dollars
to employ tutors to get children back up
to speed after they've missed two terms
of school
we're seeing really direct stimulus so
if you spend
an extra dollar on top of your existing
payroll
you'll get 10 cents of that back that's
on top of existing federal government
stimulus programs
so it's a very different and very direct
program and the aim is to essentially
blast victoria
into recovery and try and make that
money back
and pay down some of that debt before
interest rates change in potentially the
future years
to the local share market and the asx
200 and the all ordinaries rose one
percent
over the week despite falls during the
last two sessions
martin lacoste from macquarie wealth
management joined me for more on markets
martin it's been a bumper month what's
been driving all that growth
yeah it certainly has it looks like
we're up about 11 since the beginning
of november but when you think of what's
happened this month
uh certainly in terms of risks for
markets to perceive
you've had a u.s election so all of that
noise is now gone
and even the the idea of what the result
might be it was deemed as a risk
uh the announcements through the month
around uh vaccines being approved and
the potential of
vaccines being available next year has
certainly been a big one for global
financial markets there's no doubt about
that
and then domestically here we've had the
reserve bank cutting interest rates
uh adding additional liquidity into the
economy uh
and i think those sort of factors have
helped to drive the market
along with the fact towards the end of
this month it does appear now that
the economy is starting to open up again
with the reopening of borders next month
and i think that's just boosted
confidence generally do you think we'll
see the traditional
santa rally then that we are so used to
in december
well let's not get too greedy i mean
maybe we've just had it
but i i think the markets are well
supported by low interest rates and
those factors that i've just mentioned
and typically but not every year but
typically we do tend to get a new year
rally don't we
next week we'll get a reading on gdp of
course we've had two quarters
of negative growth are you expecting the
tide to turn
it does look like from all the
components that make up gdp that we're
going to have growth
in the in the green so a positive level
between two and a half
and three percent we've seen a pickup in
consumer spending
uh we've seen a modest improvement in
construction
uh the government spending is a factor
as well uh the component that was a bit
disappointing or we think will be
disappointing is business investment
that looks like it's still
running uh around a sort of negative two
or three percent uh but
broadly speaking some of those key
components that contribute to growth
are definitely on the improve of course
even if we do go back to
growth levels that we saw in 2019 they
weren't particularly
optimal or the best position we could
have been in no growth certainly was
probably sub-optimal for our economy
there was excess capacity
in a whole range of industries and
segments and employment there's no doubt
about that
but we did go into covert in a very
strong financial position
with a let's call it a balanced budget
uh by the government
and our debt to gdp was around 22 which
uh we had been pretty stable for some
time we know that's changed this has
been a crisis
but it may well be that this quite
significant amount of stimulatory action
by both the reserve bank
and the government may in fact drive
growth higher
over the next couple of years and the
potential of an overlay
of some uh ongoing structural reform
with our economy
may also be a growth driver now we get
to see that pan out
let's get through this crisis first but
i think that yeah it's possible
that we might end up seeing that in two
or three years time uh
we are above the 2019 growth levels
which had been
a bit soft that would be good news
martin lacoste thanks very much
always a pleasure thank you news of
vaccine progress and lockdown
restrictions lifting has buoyed travel
stocks but on the flip side
are the lockdown beneficiaries furniture
retailers like temple and webster
supermarkets and dominoes but is the
market being
too simplistic and have household heroes
got further to go elise morgan spoke to
jeffrey's analyst
michael simotis i don't think anything's
changed
in the short to medium term for
consumers the reality is notwithstanding
that very positive news
on potential vaccines for covert 19.
consumer behavior over the next 12
months will still be very different to
what it was
prior to covert so for example
australians prior to covert spent 110
billion dollars per year
on leisure travel roughly half of that
was international
that's not happening in the next 12
months
we think that there'll be a 60 billion
dollar tailwind in fy 21
from reduced leisure travel and at least
a 30 billion tailwind in
fy22 that money is likely to find
a new home in other expenditure
categories and so far consumers have
shown a propensity to want to spend that
money
on household goods leisure goods etc
so what about the likes of temple and
wetzer which has been such a star
um the likes of jb hi-fi kogan
um have we bought enough electronics
have we bought enough cushions and
and rugs to see those
companies just really have hit their
limits look from the numbers we've seen
recently
demand is still very strong i think
consumers have money to spend
they've got time to think about what
they want to spend money on and they
want content
in their lives so look i think we will
see continued demand for those sorts of
categories
there has been a shift towards online
purchasing
and some of those online pure play
businesses or
multi-channel businesses which have
large online presence have benefited
from a valuation perspective
and perhaps the markets made the
decision that those valuations got ahead
of themselves
but in terms of demand for products in
those housing categories i think we'll
see continued strength and the stocks
where valuations are attractive on that
basis i think will continue to perform
well
retail isn't isn't a great space for
many
what on the market wise what are you
wary of so
we're wary about valuation so for us
businesses which are performing well and
have a good outlook
but are trading at a reasonable
valuation i think are the way to play
this
so harvey norman is our top pick in the
discretionary retail space it's the
cheapest discretionary retailer we cover
there's significant property on the
balance sheet which is a nice backstop
when things do
start to slow and it trades at a
discount to its listed peers so i think
that's
a business which will or share a stock
which will benefit from
the strong earnings growth that will
come through supermarkets
were also quite positive valuations for
coals and woolworths are
reasonably elevated but these are stocks
that have always tended to be expensive
in the australian market
and we get some comfort from the fact
that those large covert related costs
are in the base and they'll start to
dissipate over time
money out of thin air that's the concept
behind
value capture currently when land is
rezoned the owners get a windfall gain
value capture takes some of that to pay
for the projects
in melbourne's outer suburbs a 150
million dollar stadium is being built
without any help
from state or federal governments daniel
ziffer reports
in its first year western united has
been kicking
goals
soon they'll have a place to call home
the field of dreams we call it because
it takes a lot of vision to think that
one day there'll be a major sporting
precinct
out here i'm here in the fast-growing
western suburbs of melbourne
about 20 minutes by train from the city
in this paddock in two years there'll be
a 15 000 seat football stadium
a commercial area and it'll be filling
up with homes
the interesting thing is how the local
government is going to pay for it
there's no state government money no
federal government money
they're making the money to finance the
stadium
essentially out of thin air
it's called value capture when
governments make infrastructure
decisions
like the location of a stadium or subway
nearby landowners get a windfall gain
different value capture models take a
share of that windfall
and return it to the public in australia
it's largely the case that the public
funds the infrastructure and
private land holders who live nearby
take the windfalls
and that has to change western united
was given this paddock by their local
council
they've sold parcels of the land for far
more than they could for normal farmland
and that money will pay for the 150
million dollar stadium we're providing
at no cost the piece of land which is
about six and a half hectares for the
stadium itself
the rest of it um anything that the
developer wants to develop on
they pay for they use the profit to pay
for the stadium
the system is common in hong kong and
has helped finance the massive new
crossrail tunnel
under london value capture closes that
loop
so that those who have the best location
who have the greatest windfall gains
actually contribute more
back to the public coffers than those
who live
two three four kilometers away and
that's the common sense element of it
we can't keep going to our state and
federal governments and saying
you build it for us so part of the value
capture idea that we've been working on
down here is how can we help with the
infrastructure build
property groups are less enthused about
a potential new tax on land
people who are participating in the
property industry consumers
people who buy dwellings people who are
tenants in commercial buildings they are
paying enough in taxes
they pay 45 of state revenue
they pay 25 of a new dwelling in the
greenfields that's enough tax they're
already paying enough
in the same way that any developer when
they build a new housing estate
makes money off it usually goes into the
shareholders pocket
instead of it going into the
shareholders pocket the profit it
actually goes to
pay the financing that's used to build
the stadium itself
in the last year of our property boom in
2017-18
land values in australia went up over
660 billion dollars in one single year
now if just a tiny skerrick of that went
back to government
we'd be able to build all the
infrastructure we needed
capturing that cash could build a lot
more fields of drains
west united leading by three goals to
one
just before the break and that's all
from close of business
i'm rachel papasoni thanks for watching
[Music]
for those of you who haven't thrown out
your 2020 bingo cards did you have this
one
in a year where everything has been
unexpected join us to make sense of it
all
when boris johnson is on the phone and
saying right now i'm sorry to bring this
up we listen to the experts when it
comes to the pandemic but we're not
listening to the experts when it comes
to climate change this is the difficult
thing for women middle age
we have them to look forward to a proud
millennial right here
i already grew all this grace i'm just
going to hang here the drum
weeknights at 6 on abc and eye view
hello and welcome to the breakfast couch
i'm paul kennedy and i'm madeline morris
coming up
then they took the children away
honoring a legend archie roach on his
entry into the aria hall of fame
culinary queen nigella lawson on
creating a scrumptious treat in lockdown
hello a warning to our viewers that this
next story will mention the name
and show images of an indigenous person
who has died
music legend archie roach was inducted
into the aria hall of fame at last
night's awards 30 years after releasing
his groundbreaking debut album charcoal
lane
to celebrate the album's anniversary he
re-recorded the tracks and released
a reimagined album the songs of charcoal
lane this year
including his renowned single took the
children away
they took us from our family
he took us away
they took us away
snatched on our mother's breast said
this is for the best
who took us away and we're pleased to
say the great archie roach joins us now
on news breakfast
archie good morning to you good morning
congratulations on several aria rewards
last night you keep
racking them up including getting into
the hall of fame what does that mean to
you
very nice oh know it's a
it's a big honor and you know after all
these years you know 30
years still still playing music and
recording
uh it's a great honor and
to be recognized that's for sure yeah
well we spoke earlier this year about
your the 30-year anniversary of that
breakthrough album uh those beautiful
songs but you've just one male artist of
the year as well so
in in some ways you're in your prime
you've written a book and uh released
another album
uh it's been a remarkable year for you
yeah it's it's amazing that you know
um this year before you know
before um covered did you know the cover
uh just um through everything hit
everybody for a six
um yeah and then even through that we
still managed to do
to do to do so much so
yeah man so i'll get my manager pattern
back to jill sheldon
and just be around able to do that yeah
and uh i note that in your acceptance
speech you had your great mate paul
kelly there with you and you moved him
to tears
uh not not for the first time i suspect
[Music]
no no like they call it actually we go
go that long way and
[Music]
uh
when you sang those songs recently we
just played a clip of you singing
um take the children away when
30 years later and i i heard you i read
a quote saying that
in some ways you i think you were
singing it in in a room in your
house uh overlooking the yard in some
ways that was the best way to sing it
and and the song gets even better when
you sing it
these days is that true for you yeah
it's
you know the java record uh these songs
in
in my home at my kitchen table where
where a lot of the songs were written
actually at the kitchen table
uh you know in melbourne when we're in
melbourne but
up here on southwest victoria
congressman country
my mother's area uh and looking at my
backyard just
so relaxed and comfortable and and the
songs the songs that
have grown you know as i've grown
through the years over three so
i had a better idea i think of how to
sing them and interpret them
and of course you've had your health um
challenges too archie but
how do you how do you um how do you
see your voice at the moment it's um you
know when when you hit top notch it's as
good as ever isn't it
yeah when i went ahead yeah when i want
to get those top lights is still as good
it's a little rougher down down you know
in some areas but yeah
[Music]
some of the health problems i've had
there as well yeah and just a quick one
on the archie road stolen generation
educational resource
you're not only writing books and
producing music and winning awards
you're still um giving in in that
community area as well
yeah i love it it's great to be able to
do the um the
the resources uh strong generation
resources you know with other elders
and that talking about you know picking
out truth and
and uh and uh and healing of course
heading through
yeah through whatever way we we see fit
yeah
yeah and just briefly to finish up you
have you um
got plenty in you for 2021 what's your
what's your um
outlook for the next year if if
everything goes well and we can move
around and all the rest of it oh look i
i'm you know i i'm keen you know
uh just gonna forget a few things and uh
yeah
spirit spirit spirit it's always strong
spirit
flesh may be a little little uh
tired and that but spirit's always
strong yeah so i'm looking forward to it
next year that's for sure rest up and uh
we hope to see you
out and about again archie roach always
a real thrill to have you on the program
and everyone at home is thinking the
same thing so
go well and congratulations again on
your hall last night
thanks bk thank you
[Music]
fanny lumsden has released her third
album i was nominated for seven
golden guitar awards and has been
nominated for the 2020 australian music
prize and to top it all off she took out
the award for the best country album at
last night's arias here is her
latest fantastic single
[Music]
so cool down at the bolds club fanny
joins us now from puma
in new south wales fanny great to speak
to you this morning and welcome is the
balls club your normal haunt there
um yeah look i actually hadn't been to
that particular one and it was tucked
away the add-a-long bowls club that i
am it was a lifelong dream of mine to
come like to combine cracker jack and
flashdance in a regional setting so
and you absolutely nail it hey
congratulations on the award what does
that mean to you to take out the uh best
country
oh it's insane i um i still don't really
believe it happened i think it's because
i'm here on the farm
and um um well actually the family
fashioned a
um an award for me but yeah it's
unbelievable
um well did you have a bit of a red
carpet there is that right yeah
yeah yeah we did we um we got a ream of
red carpet from the local
um carpet in place in wagga and um and
rolled it out
and um we did our red carpet up on top
of the hill to start with and then
brought it down to the garden for um
before last night so it was great
fanny zann here it's um it looked
amazing on your social media when i was
looking at that red carpet
how how strange was it for you to sort
of recreate the arias
in the tiny town of tumar because it was
a really different arias this year but
for you and your family out on that
massive property
did it feel like australian music's
night of nights
it really did look we recreated the best
we could um
you know the free hors d'oeuvres and
that we'd made ourselves
and the free drinks that we paid for
ourselves no
it was um it was a it was a really fun
night it was actually super special to
celebrate it with
my family and friends and you know like
all of these people that have been a big
part of the whole process of the album
having had to release it from home and
um and actually we recorded it right
here in this stone height that's right
behind me
so yeah it was great um so i mean this
album as you were saying that you
recorded it at home
it was came out at such an incredible
time not just for covert but also was
really influenced by the
by the fires early in the year tell us
about that
[Music]
yeah so actually all the behind me um
and all entirely burnt um back in
january this valley was
you know one of the many valleys in
australia that was entirely kind of
wiped out and
we had three weeks without power here
and
um yeah we've kind of been really
involved in the fire so it had a really
profound impact because the album and
the songs were so influenced by this
area and these people um i kind of i had
to i had to
like talk about it it had to be
mentioned and and so yeah it became
a lot a big part of the story and we
actually launched the album just down
the hill here at toma in the rec
at the rec reserve and where we donated
all the money that we made um
to the local bushfire recovery fund so
it's been a
had a huge impact actually in the whole
story that's fantastic yeah it looks so
rich behind you so it's
sprung back to life nicely and uh you'd
be pleased to know uh fanny that our um
our floor manager joe is doing the exact
dance of not that everyone can see
the exact dance of the uh the lead lawn
bowl guy there
that's good actually he should put that
on social media i think we're gonna do a
competition but i don't know anyone had
beat peter branch he was
old pete he really just nailed it well
look it's
it's great to speak to and you must be
really pleased to be back touring fanny
oh yes it's i am very excited like too
excited
it's very yeah we're back on the road
this weekend so it's very great
well lovely to speak to you thank you so
much and good luck for the golden
guitars and congratulations again
thank you so much thank you
our next guest has been keeping fans
entertained during the pandemic with
videos of
life in lockdown do you want a cup of
tea oh no
coffee black i shouldn't drink milk oh
god why am i so
fat you're so fat i am why
well for a start you eat too much you
drink too much and you take no exercise
darling darling please it's far more
likely to be an allergy to something
isn't it
eddie and patsy i mean i just love it
actually anthony
and tim they have made me laugh so much
over the last six seven months now that
restrictions are easing across the
country
anthony clear is moving that
entertainment
from the screen to the stage with the
national tour next year
here's a bit of what fans will be able
to hear live
ah the fittingly titled together again
tour starting in may
and anthony clear joins us on the couch
now good morning welcome good morning
thanks for having me usually i'm
watching you guys at home on my couch oh
it's nice to be
here usually waiting until nine o'clock
so i can take the dog out for a poo so i
don't have to worry about that this
morning what's it like being
out and about i know i had to put on a
suit this morning
it feels good that's awesome i can't
look let's start with this tour plan
because when did you feel that
the time was going to be right to
actually say i can sell tickets we can
confidently go ahead with this
um i've been working on this for a while
and obviously i was
somewhat taking advice going when can we
put this on sale and so forth and i feel
as though now
there's obviously a light at the end of
the tunnel and there's a bit of hope and
i
and i really wanted to encapsulate the
the essence
of what we should be doing and it should
be coming together again and that's why
i wanted to call the tour
the together again tour and i cannot
wait to kick it off in may next year and
um
to bring the band together again when i
called them and said we're going on too
it was like
kids in candy store here i need to get
back on stage christmas
yeah it's going to be great 2021 if
everything goes well and by the way your
music um
as a nod to 2020 seems a bit uh
introspective as well
uh what's wrong with me a question that
a lot of us have asked
when we've had too much time online well
yeah there was one track called what's
wrong with me and then there was another
track called
lonely yeah and then the other track was
called shadows so basically when you're
walking around the house by yourself for
the time there's always shadows and
you're feeling very lonely here
and the video was actually filmed in
your place wasn't it yeah well you know
couldn't leave home so basically i said
to my partner i go get out
the um phone and start filming and we're
filming a video clip and he's like okay
let's do this
right and that of course then gave tim
the impetus to then start doing
some pretty quirky videos yeah well
surprising you every time you walked in
the door
you know like there was no end of it he
had power in the
phone i am sick of being scared every
day
in that home like he just jumps out of
every corner in that house and
yesterday i rocked up for a swim at my
local pool and lady goes oh you've got
some great hairs on your
i'm like yeah that's jim
it's lucky you've been able to have a
laugh together but what has been the
hardest thing
of the past year it's um i suppose
having something that you love so much
taken away
from you and i didn't realize and
sometimes we take it for granted like
our work and our jobs and
i really didn't realize how how much i
love walking on stage in live
performance and
to literally have someone say you can't
do that for the rest of the year
it was just a really weird feeling but
um
you know you have to somewhat go okay
this is a situation i'm pretty lucky
in terms of my life to be where i am so
i'm not going to sit here and complain
and
we sort of just focused on other things
and you know in a relationship it's sort
of
you know it can be testing when you're
stuck in a home 24 17
but it was not always champagne yeah no
we only put the good stuff on social
media
espresso martinis that kept us hydrated
don't you worry
so a lot of people will be nodding at
home um hearing you say that you've
missed loving what
you do and um so many people across
australia have done that
is there anything that's going to change
in your life as a result of that that
extra gratitude i guess
well i wasn't the most patient person
normally
but i feel as though 2020 has taught me
a little bit of patience
i'm sure i'm going to undo that very
quickly though what else we get into 21.
not necessarily no i think you know i
reckon it's um it's going to be
life-changing
whether we have habits that we'll hang
on to now i wish patience had been one
of the habits that i had adopted in 2020
no you missed that boat did you
during the pandemic many of us have
indulged in some comfort eating to help
us get through
don't feel guilty yes the queen of
comfort eating has gone one step further
using her time during isolation in
london to
compile a sumptuous new recipe book cook
eat repeat is the latest in a long line
of best-selling books
from the one and only nigella lawson i
caught up with her a little earlier
nigella lawson welcome to news breakfast
thank you how's 20 joining from my
kitchen
well i was going to say you've spent an
awful lot of time there haven't you this
year
yes how's 2020 been
when i'm i feel i've been very fortunate
i'm one of the ones who's
you know had work and i've been safe
so i feel i feel lucky
and inspired yes it's
you know it was a it was a strange thing
to be uh
writing this book under lockdown and
in a way it gave me this sense of real
connection with people that really
was important you know and i i think
in that way it's it's sort of fed me on
a num
in a number of ways what do you think
people
have realized during the pandemic about
their attitude to food do you think it's
changed
i think so i think that many people
have realized that it provides
such it can provide such a focus and if
you like
uh something that really connects you to
one another
uh i have i think frankly all my life
you know
my focus is always like on the evening
meal and i think for many people they
realize
too that this was something that by
thinking about what they were going to
eat
and and sort of reflecting on that
making this big thing at the end of the
day
actually provides so much sustenance
throughout the day
as a as a focus and as something that
perhaps they realize that cooking it
wasn't a showing off
thing you weren't trying to uh cook as
if you were in a restaurant it really
was i think that people understood
it was just about um
really getting as much pleasure and
you know sustenance physical and
emotional as as possible
and i think that's i think that's the
really important thing about home
cooking
it's it has such emotional resonance
uh as well as being just the sort of
cozy familiar wonderful food we like to
eat
now jelly can i ask you about one of the
recipes in particular that's already
creating a bit of fuss which is the
banana skin and cauliflower
curry yes really banana skin
yeah well yeah i mean in some parts of
the world this probably wouldn't raise
an eyebrow
i had i've got a couple of recipes
for banana bread and one which i also
make is this really sort of luscious
molten pudding and because just because
i can't throw
very very very open honors away and then
i read somewhere that you could eat
banana skins so i thought oh that's
wonderful i mean that
that really makes me even happier
because i love using up bit you know
odds and ends
and so i tried it out and i think it's
extraordinary because it was a bit of a
you have to take a bit of a deep breath
you think it's going to taste one
incredibly bananary and also very
fibrous but you soak them
i mean when i soak them i just pour
boiling water a bit of turmeric bit of
salt
and by the time it's cold the banana
skins
have softened they don't feel bad soft
until you cook them
but they're they're a wonderful texture
they don't taste a banana actually but
they were a wonderful texture
and the sort of this wonderful sort of
padded softness a bit like
an eggplant skin with a bit of with a
bit more flesh on it
and it soaks up whatever sauce you cook
them in and this is
mine is a very sort of mild curry more
aromatic than hot but
uh i can't stop so many recipes so many
books
where do you keep finding the
inspiration
well i mean to be honest i mean greed
does most of the work because i'm always
thinking what should i eat next
but this was an interesting particularly
i don't know important book for me
because i was really reflecting on
the the flavors i love the ingredients
that i always have to have in my kitchen
and that really is important
nigella we know that you have a lovely
relationship with australia and
you'd normally be hoping to spend a bit
of your well the australian summer
holidays down here so we're sorry
you can't visit not as sorry as i am
yeah we noticed we've got a bit of
vegemite in the background
you can see how tidy i am with all those
things left out on the counter but i'm
hoping to be
back just as soon as it's
you know it's possible nigella
congratulations on
cook eat repeat it's a wonderful book
thank you
we need to talk about movember thank you
for everyone's feedback by the way which
has been
uh no no in a large part it's been quite
negative
but i appreciate people telling me that
i need to shave my mustache off right
now on social media thanks very much for
that feedback
but it's not about me the annual event
which is now in its 17th year aims to
raise awareness for men's mental health
and nathan appo is an ambassador for
movember
you might have seen his face up on a few
billboards
yeah and nathan is uh joining me and my
mo bro
on the couch here from brisbane it's not
fair
you've got the hair to complement your
magnificent mustache
it definitely does help but um
definitely do not shave it pk you look
amazing you look like a i think a tom
a young tom selly oh thank you do not
shave it you're doing
you're doing great oh hang on i think
we've got a photo of tom selleck
not quite nathan thanks anyway mate you
are no
tom selleck my friend oh thanks hey
nathan
you've been doing this for a while
though you've had lots of practice
yeah i have i've been a mobile for about
uh six or seven years now and
um you know movember just resonates with
me it's a
passion of mine i work in indigenous
health for uh
an organization called the institute for
urban indigenous health
our flagship programs are deadly choices
and it's all about
preventative health and getting in and
seeing your doctor not when you're sick
but uh to get a 715 health check and
we struck up a partnership a few years
back and
um i just sort of know what movember's
about and what it means and
it was just something i had to be a part
of and it's a great campaign
um saving men's lives all around the
world
raising much needed funds and awareness
for men's health and
how can you not be a part of it and yeah
yeah
like i said it's it's such a
inspirational and and
important cause and you just have to be
part of it um
it's some it's definitely a a story in a
campaign that connects us all as men
um but also how most sisters are always
uh
standing right by our side are raising
much of
funds and awareness for us as well
nathan thank you very much some
beautiful messages there
and i'm uh i'm pleased that you're up on
the billboards mate that's a that's
that's a face to promote well play
david williams stories sell tens of
millions of copies worldwide
and he's even managing to snag roles
that have already been adapted for the
small williams
latest children's book code name bananas
is set in wartime london and he joins us
now
david good morning welcome to breakfast
you have to excuse us we're a bit thrown
today because we've been getting so much
good news here on what's happening with
coronavirus and i'm very conscious that
you
are not getting the same good news over
there but i'm so glad you could join us
that's all right um i'm locked down it's
the evening here i've got nothing else
to do i've got nowhere to go
so i'm actually delighted to be talking
to you i'm
not missing a thing do you have your
dogs there for company though
my dogs are here keeping me company so i
i do think at this time
thank god for children and dogs in that
order because i'm lucky enough to be a
father to a seven-year-old son
um and he makes life great and my dogs
make life great too so i'm very lucky
i'm not alone my mom for example she's
she's not been able to see anyone
because we're in a lockdown and we've
been locked out for about three and a
half weeks here in the uk
and i'm talking to her every day on a
video call like we are now but it's just
not the same as being able to hug your
mom
and everything so it's it's a difficult
situation but we're all doing our best
aren't we because we've all got to do
what we're told
because if we all do what we're told the
situation i'm sure will get better
and another thing that is good in
isolation is if you can write
best-selling books uh tell us about this
this latest
well i'm very lucky because my job
you know wasn't affected that much um by
by being locked down in fact it's kind
of better because the thing you need as
a writer
is time and space so i actually
wrote a lot of code named bananas which
i have right here
in lockdown and uh it's set in
1940 in london my mum and dad lived
through the second world war
um and had lots of stories about it as
did my grandparents i'd always want to
write a story about the second world war
but i thought i wanted to write a fun
story because i know it's obviously
quite a heavy subject war and i
i like to write funny children's books
and so
it's about going on the run with a
gorilla from london zoo
and uncovering a deadly nazi plot to
kill winston churchill that's the story
of the book so
it's not historically accurate
but um i just wanted to write a real
page turner for kids you know i just
i think when i meet parents and i meet
kids you know
you get a lot of reluctant readers a lot
of people say it's very difficult to get
my son or daughter to read a book
so i kind of think i just want to make
it really really fun
and just turn kids on to reading and um
and so far the book's done really well
and uh i had a couple of weeks at number
one and then barack obama
brought out a book i don't even heard of
him but he has to be
the president of the united states of
america before the orange man
took over and um anyway his book's now
number one and uh i'm number two but i
couldn't i was hoping i'd be number one
because
if i'm number one if i beat barack obama
barack obama will know who i am
oh name bananas
but unfortunately that is not the case
he is definitely number one
but i've had a great response from
readers i've always had an amazing
response in australia
and i'm so gutted because often every
couple of years i get to come to
australia and
meet you guys do the tv shows do the
radio shows and meet the readers
meet all the kids who like reading my
books and do events and stuff and
they're so much fun
and you get such a great reaction in
australia you know i remember just
swimming
um in sydney and just someone's coming
past me and going
welcome to australia you know people are
very proud to be australian quite
rightly and they're proud of their
beautiful country
and they're very very welcoming so i
know your borders are currently closed
but when your borders are open they're
right very much come and visit again
yeah well we'd love to be able to
welcome you back i was just trying to
work out whether barack obama's
daughters might have been
a bit old for mr stinky and gangster
granny that was one of my favorites
gangster granny
i think they might have been a bit old
but look this one is a real treat and
it's been so lovely to have you on the
program
today david you can head off to ready
wonderful
thank you see ya see you're right thank
you have a lovely day everybody take
care
that's it for now from the breakfast
couch we'll see you again soon goodbye
the women's national basketball league
[Music]
watch them rise
the ballers are back the wnvl
live and free today at five on abc and
iview
celebrating 75 years of covering life on
the land
i'm the only abc reporter for hundreds
of kilometers
in a special episode head off the beaten
track
with abc's rural reporters you've got
the table all set up for me what happens
out
here matters see how far we've come he's
one of the modern fathers of australian
agriculture and horticulture
and where we're going you've really got
to be a jack of all trades up here
landline tomorrow 12 30. on abc and
iview
dear humans we need to talk there's
pollution in my air
and plastic in my oceans my trees and
animals are disappearing
and my temperature is rising my climate
is changing
i think i can fix it but i can't fix it
on my own
small changes can have a big impact and
right now
we need to take care of each other
signed your planet
a season of stories exploring our
environment your planet on abc
once a year our great barrier reef
explodes with new life
join us for a live television special
revealing the secrets of the reef
at the time of its annual mass spawning
event
we'll have experts above and below the
water
and cameras running night and day
looking at the health of the reef
and how it's responding to the
challenges of our time over two big
nights
reef live starts this friday on abc and
iview
today temperature records set to tumble
as a heat wave
descends across the country south east
also ahead two people charged with
manslaughter after a three-year-old girl
dies in queensland
the head of iran's nuclear program
killed in a targeted attack
with israel accused of being involved
chinese tariffs on wine imports deal a
blow to australian producers
still recovering from bushfires and
[Music]
drought
and australia kick-starts the summer of
cricket in sizzling style
with a dominant display against india in
the first one day
international
[Music]
good morning to you it is saturday the
28th of november
you're watching weekend breakfast i'm
fazia ibrahim and i'm katherine robinson
thanks for your company today
now the first significant heat wave of
the season
is here and it is expected to smash
november
records severe to extreme heat wave
conditions are spreading across
much of the southeast and eastern parts
of australia this weekend
with authorities urging people to plan
ahead well sarah tomeska
has more from adelaide and she joins us
now good morning to you sarah can you
take us through just how hot it got
overnight and which parts of the state
are sweltering through the worst of it
good morning yeah it has been an
absolutely scorching 24 hours here in
south australia
yesterday we saw tops of 45 degrees in
the state's north and mid-north
tops of 40 degrees in adelaide and those
hot conditions are expected to continue
today
although a cool change will come in
later this afternoon
bringing some reprieve and pushing that
really severe hot weather system further
east but
we are looking at tops of 47 degrees
in parts of the states far north today
so warmer
ud nada kuberpedi all reaching 47
degrees today
adelaide will stay mild so to speak a
top of 38 degrees
here before that cool change comes
through about three o'clock which is
expected to be accompanied by
rain so it's a little bit cooler than
yesterday which
peaked at 40 degrees here in
the state's capital and overnight
temperatures of 28 degrees it was 26
degrees at five o'clock this morning so
still very
balmy it is a fair way off the november
record
of 43.3 degrees though that was set last
year
but significantly higher than the
november average of 25 degrees so
very much still hot conditions here in
sa and the ses has
issued extreme heat wave warnings for
the state's riverland
and the northeast pastoral district so
people are being advised
to stay indoors with the air
conditioning on if they've got it
you know drink plenty of water avoid
coffee and alcohol things that might
dehydrate you
and look after the vulnerable in the
community so that's the very young and
the elderly are particularly susceptible
to the heat
and of course look after those pets that
you might have as well it's
extraordinary to think that we're
speaking in terms of 38 degrees being
mild
isn't it um can you take us through the
height and fire danger
through south australia what's happening
with the winds and that fire danger
well you're right it's very hot dry
and windy uh today so there is a total
fire ban across
most of the state with the exception of
the west coast
the lower south east towards robe and
mount gambia
and metropolitan adelaide but there are
still very high
fire danger warnings in place for those
areas so the cfs will
no doubt be on high alert today
considering especially
there were nine grass fires just
yesterday
one of which burnt at templars which is
about an hour north of
adelaide that burnt through 650 hectares
in just a matter of
hours so the cfs has
raised alerts that these grass fires
burn
very quickly they burn very hot as well
so they will
certainly be looking out for those
dangerous conditions today as well
now we know sarah that people are going
to be trying to escaping the heat today
perhaps perhaps finding waterways and
going heading to the beach
but authorities are reminding people to
keep those coronavirus restrictions in
mind particularly given
that adelaide has just come out of that
snap lockdown
well that's right you know apart from
the
health advice in terms of the extreme
heat we have to heed the covert 19
health advice so
people who are fortunate enough to live
along the coast if you are heading to
the beach or you know along
the murray river people are being
advised to socially distance
uh if you're heading to the shops
to shop the sales that are currently on
people are being asked to wear a face
mask
sanitize their hands and keep a
social distance of at least 1.5 meters
away from others and
of course this is all a little bit
harder for people in
the regions it's already harder to keep
cool
uh when you're in land but we know that
swimming pools have been
uh restricted to lap swimming only so
people won't be able to jump in just in
the
rec recreation lane um to cool off so
i'm sure there'll be a lot of sprinklers
going in
the states north for a couple of cold
showers or cold baths sarah temesca
thanks for joining us
thanks now a total fire ban has been
issued for the new south wales riverina
region with hot and windy conditions
forecast
the band covers the lower central west
plains and the eastern
southern and northern riverina regions
all fire permits are also suspended now
temperatures
are expected to soar into the high 30s
and mid 40s this weekend
and more fire bans are expected to be
announced later today
tourists are no longer allowed to travel
to queensland's fraser island due to a
large bushfire that's been burning for
six weeks
fire authorities are concerned about
deteriorating weather conditions this
weekend and have restricted travel
to ireland residents and essential
workers this is not an evacuation of the
island
and anyone who is currently on the
island is able to stay
but we are asking everyone to pay
attention to current warnings
as the situation could deteriorate
two people have been charged with
manslaughter over the death of a
three-year-old girl
in northeastern queensland police
investigations suggest the
child had been left inside a locked car
in townsville
for most of the day yesterday a 29 year
old man and 37 year old woman are due to
appear in court today
australia's trade stash with china has
escalated sharply with new tariffs set
to hit our wine industry hard
from today all australian wine will be
hit with a one to two hundred percent
hike
a move wine growers say will devastate
their industry
china claims australia is unfairly
subsidising its winemakers
but the federal government says
beijing's actions are a clear breach of
an existing trade agreement
the cumulative impact of china's trade
sanctions
against a number of australian
industries during the course of this
year
does give rise to the perception that
these actions
are being undertaken as a result or in
response
to some other factors australian
academic
kylie moore gilbert has arrived in
australia after being imprisoned in iran
for two years on
espionage charges the former melbourne
university lecturer was reportedly set
free in exchange for three iranians
being released from a thai
prison though prime minister scott
morrison has refused to comment on
whether the swap had taken place
iran has confirmed that the country's
leading nuclear scientist has been
assassinated iranian media is reporting
armed gunmen open fire on the car of
mohsen
fakhri zadeh he is said to have died
from fatal wounds after being taken to
hospital iran has accused israel of
being involved in the killing
the world health organization says
evaluation of the astroj
estrazenica oxford university
coronavirus vaccine
needs to be based on more than just a
press release
the drug company will conduct a second
late stage trial after doubts were
raised about the
90 level of effectiveness the company
initially announced first of all limited
amount that can be said in a press
release and secondly
um it really needs to be reviewed in
terms of the
the data and and questions asked about
the data that
uh may come up in the course of the
review
now here's an odd connection american
singer cher has met with pakistan's
prime minister
in her effort to re-home what's been
dubbed the world's
loneliest elephant cher has taken up the
cause of
kavan the elephant which has languished
in a pakistani zoo
for 35 years since losing his partner in
carvan has been diagnosed as suffering
from behavioural issues due to his
isolation
and is both overweight and malnourished
cavan is set to leave on sunday for a
sanctuary in cambodia
where he'll be resettled with his own
kind
isn't that lovely i mean she must have
sung or asked him do you believe in life
after love after love after love
do you think i was wondering if she was
hoping she could turn back time
and make things different for cover
anyway you're lucky we didn't sing it
that's all i'm going to say
i think it's probably appropriate that
we head to louise ransom now we missed
you last week
great to have you back on board nice to
be back huh and um it was all a buzz at
the scg last night with the cricket it
was summer cricket's off to a good start
from australia's point of view that a
66-run victory over india
in the odi series opener in sydney last
night it also
just 66 deliveries hitting 11 fours and
four sixes
then glen maxwell found some form as
well with a quick fire 45 from 19 balls
and the indian attack was dismantled
thanks partly to some poor fielding
but the host storming to a total of six
for 374 that shaky start you just saw
there from australian posts crashed to
four for 104
in the 14th over that left darwin to try
speaking there he hates batting at the
scg terrible record there he's going to
do it again
on sunday tomorrow and as they try to
level up this series uh three
game series they need to win tomorrow to
be able to uh to do that uh but great to
see him
back in australia so many indian
supporters in the crowd it almost feels
like you know the the indians are
the home team at some point when they
play in australia so uh but great to
have the summer of cricket
underway of course absolutely thank you
lou thanks
well let's check the weather in the
capitals today brisbane you could expect
a sunny day
sydney hot and mostly sunny canberra a
possible shower or
storm melbourne some showers increasing
hobart partly cloudy adelaide
very hot with rain developing perth
sunny day for you and darwin
a shower or two and a possible storm
well we have a big show coming up here
on weekend breakfast a little later this
hour
every year the japanese film festival
takes over cinema screens across
australia but
thanks to the global pandemic the annual
event will look a little different this
time round returning for its 24th year
as a digital festival from epic animes
to geisha inspired comedies
fans can settle in for 10 days of
japan's finest cinema and fauzi
it's all for free it is amazing i'm
really looking forward to this i mean
you can watch this in the comfort
from the comforts of your own couch
making some beautiful japanese films as
well
one of my favorite documentaries on the
tsujuki fish market in tokyo as well
is on offer we'll be speaking to the
festival
programmer film programmer and lee so is
that right is but the fish market's
moved it moved about two years ago
so was it filmed in the old one or the
new one the old one that's right it's
the stories of the people who
had been uh operating there forever yes
uh
and how you know they're sad that it's
moving and i was lucky enough to go
there once
and i was stitched up i think by my
family we served
i was served up the most beautiful fresh
raw
fish but i got the horse meat of course
of course why not did you like it though
it was a little
smoky and it repeated on me something
lovely nice anyway it's an experience
now we're going to change gears and
we're going to talk about what's
happening in the u.s and u.s president
donald trump is rapidly running out of
time
and legal options to advance his
argument that the election was
quote rigged according to him after
suffering
another defeat in the courts well let's
get more now from greg jenner who joins
us from
washington dc we know this latest case
was in pennsylvania just talk us through
the what this case was actually based on
fauzi donald trump can't really take a
trick in the courts right now the
dismissal of his claims seem to be
coming
almost daily and this latest case was
before
a federal appeals court and it
summarily dismissed the appeal which was
based on an earlier ruling in a
pennsylvania court that there had been
multiple forms of
irregularity particularly in the vote
counting
processes and a lot of those claims
centered on the access that vote
monitors
or what we would call in australia
scrutineers had and whether
republicans weren't favored and
democrats were favored but the long
story
cut short here fawzia is that donald
trump just can't get to advance any
argument because
in this latest federal appeal as in
other court hearings before it
the judges have gone to some lengths to
say there is no merit here you haven't
laid out any
specificity to back your claims of
voting irregularity or to use donald
trump's word
fraud so it's back to square one the
only
remaining step really now is to try to
kick it
up to the supreme court of the united
states the key word there is to try
it's not a given that the supreme court
would
grant its attention to be given to these
claims but there have been
some indications via twitter from some
of donald trump's legal team members
that they do intend they say to take
this
to the supreme court next so no luck so
far
but yet they persist all right so greg
with his
legal avenues running out i suppose
reality is now starting to
dawn on the president and his team as
well and
the latest development is that he has
confirmed that he will
leave the white house if he loses
but what does lose actually mean to
donald trump it's
well exactly it sounds simple if you
take it at face value but there are
important preconditions
that donald trump put on that statement
which actually wasn't really a statement
it was more a response to a journalist's
question
interesting because he hadn't taken any
for three weeks since
election day on the third of november
here so
the question was if joe biden is
granted the win by the presidential
electoral
college would you leave the white house
and the answer was certainly
certainly you know i will but it's the
precondition
there falzia it's the electoral college
will it and when might it award the
victory to
joe biden well pretty much all of that
is going to be stacked up
and voted on on the 14th of december so
this leaves under
three weeks for donald trump to try
to somehow thwart or halt even
the electoral commission process very
very difficult when you consider that
he's had no
luck so far so it was a highly qualified
statement
it appeared yes on face value to say
there is a point at which i would be
prepared to go
and to go quietly but and then there are
a whole lot of buts that he threw in
there
the election's fraudulent i um
there's no way that joe biden got the 80
million votes that
the tally says that he did in the
popular vote and it's almost
as if having said the earlier indication
of a concession that there would be an
acceptance that he'd have to leave the
white house it's almost as if donald
trump had second thoughts on this
because he subsequently
took to twitter and wrote that biden can
only enter
the white house as president if he can
prove that his ridiculous 80 million
votes were not fraudulently
or illegally obtained so it's almost
like he's feeding back off that
journalist question and the answer that
he gave to try and revisit the argument
and say well i
might leave but then i wouldn't unless
we can get all this sorted in the chords
so a tough road to hoe for donald trump
on almost any level it certainly is
meanwhile all this is playing out with
the backdrop for
rising coronavirus uh infection cases in
the united states we know it is the
thanksgiving holiday we know that this
is the time that
a lot of americans uh you know travel to
see their family to spend thanksgiving
together
and they have been advised to stay at
home but not many have heeded that
advice
no the numbers overall to be fair fauzia
are lower than what they would typically
be
in any other non-pandemic year but
yes in view of the very high case
numbers that are flowing
through the united states at present
still higher than any health authority
would have wanted
on thanksgiving alone the transportation
security agency that does all the
screening
at domestic airports tallied half a
million americans moving on that day
alone other days beforehand had figures
as high as
1 million so much higher than people had
wanted i think there's an estimate of
general movements by car and other means
at about 6 million americans on the move
on
thanksgiving so it is widely anticipated
that this will show up as yet a further
upward blip in the numbers
not immediately of course it takes a
week or so maybe even two weeks
but it is generally anticipated that
those numbers that were
pushing up around 200 190 000
every day will get a spike down the
track
just as a footnote though fazia the
numbers for thanksgiving that have come
through
are a little low but artificially so
they dropped down
simply because about 20 states
didn't actually report their testing
figures because it was a public holiday
so the number dropped down
to about a hundred and ten thousand
ninety odd thousand lower than what it's
been
all right greg jenner we're gonna have
to leave it there thank you so much greg
janet they're reporting for us from
washington
now australia is bracing for a heat wave
this weekend as summer rounds the corner
the east coast
in particular is expecting severe
weather conditions today with
soaring temperatures and gusty winds
forecast well total fire bans are in
place across parts of new south wales
victoria south australia and queensland
for more let's speak to jonathan howe
who is a senior meteorologist
at the bureau of meteorology and he
joins us now uh good morning to you
thank you for joining us
yeah good morning catherine fazia we
spoke to our reporter
in adelaide uh just earlier in the
bulletin
uh discussing about how hot it was
overnight the experiences yesterday but
this heat wave
is affecting not just south australia
but it's all the east coast and the
other states can you give us a snapshot
of where it's at at the moment and what
we can expect today
yeah that's exactly right so summers
officially starts next week it's a very
timely reminder what's to come with
severe to extreme heat air conditions
set to grip much of south east and
eastern australia so as you mentioned
south australia is really in the group
super right now
particularly into south western queens
and we saw 46.5 degrees yesterday in
birdsville
in outback queensland and above 40
degrees in adelaide and
certainly for today the focus of the
head is going to be around eastern parts
of south australia
western new south wales and also eastern
new south wales as well in northern
victoria but
really focusing around i guess the
partial district of south australia
where because the temperatures get up to
46 even 47 degrees
anywhere around the districts around uh
roxby downs up into murray as well
and also into western new south wales
adelaide going for another scorcher
today 38 degrees there after a very hot
night
and even eastern new south wales i will
see a one of two days
above 40 degrees through western sydney
up into the high 30s along the coast
there as well
and not much relief on the way for new
south wales so it's going to be quite a
long duration
and exceptional heat event over the next
few days before we move on from
uh south australia when is a reprieve
expected there and what are the winds
likely to do
and how might that play into the fire
dangers
yes adelaide really swelted last night i
got around to about 22 degrees but the
northerly has picked up across adelaide
and we're going to expect to exceed
temperatures in the 30s by midday
it is going to cool down through the
afternoon before a stronger
southwesterly cool change comes through
probably late afternoon early evening as
well but ahead of that we are seeing
very strong northwesterly winds and
that's really helping to fuel some of
those fire dangers for today
so we're seeing extreme fire dangers for
parts of the flinders and also the i
guess the mid north areas so anywhere
from around roseworthy
up to port augustine we've seen those
temperatures 46 even 48 degrees for
today
so there are total fire bats in place by
the cfs but also into north west
victoria as well we're seeing
extreme fire dangers for the mallee
where temperature is going to soar up to
45 degrees along the murray as well so
not just the heat but also the very
strong winds are creating very dangerous
fire weather conditions for today
and so is the mallee the only reason in
victoria that is going to be impacted by
this heat wave or how will that play out
for victoria and how long for
yeah so victoria for today it's really
north of the range is going to see the
really um
intense heat south of the ranges for
southern victoria and melbourne
are quite lucky actually you're going to
see some southerly breezes and also some
clouds and showers around so
melbourne is going for top of 25 degrees
today so really quite mild
but anywhere north of the ranges we
could see even um i guess november
records being approached
places like mildura echuca and even
across the border into the riverino new
south wales as well
in terms of that cool change expected to
come through later towards the evening
as well but certainly waking up at
sunday tomorrow
much cooler across victoria as the hit
really moves into new south wales but
tomorrow
let's talk about new south wales over
the the immediate uh
time and in going into the weekend we
know that
uh parts of the western suburbs uh of
sydney will be around 41 degrees the cbd
mid 30s can you give us a snapshot of
what's happening
in the state today and how that will
progress over the weekend
yeah so today we're going to see
temperatures in the high 40s across
western new south wales
high 30s and low 40s along the coast but
as you mentioned absolute scorching
conditions for sydney
and a very hot night on the way for
sydney cider so do brace for that
but we're seeing just really strong
northerly winds and we do have some
damaging
wind warnings out for more mountain
areas uh really strong
north-westerly winds up to 125
kilometers an hour and for tomorrow the
heat's going to make it all the way to
the coast and we are going to see
very high to severe fire dangers for the
east coast including sydney
likely to see some total fire bans
issued by the rfs but there is a core
change coming along the coast we're
going to see a very strong southerly
buster move through
southern parts of new south wales
through the afternoon and that's
expected in sydney around the early
evening as well but we're going to see a
very rapid drop in temperatures about 10
to 20 degrees in the space of an hour
along the coast wow you could also see
some thunderstorms
yes a very very um i guess dramatic
dramatic drop yeah
and uh yeah thunderstorms as well on the
change which will be dry
so that could ignite new fires with dry
lightning so a lot of concern uh focus
for fire dangers
for new south wales tomorrow with
another spike day coming on tuesday so
certainly keeping the fire authorities
on edge over the next few days yeah i
bet
and as uh that cool change comes into
sydney on late
sunday or master of new south wales this
uh pressure system will
be moving up into queensland they're
looking at extreme temperatures
sunday monday tuesday yeah it's exactly
right so new south wales does get some
relief late tomorrow into monday but
north eastern parts of new south wales
and up into i guess the darling downs in
southeast queensland
it's going to see extreme heat weather
conditions last until thursday
are really focusing around western
brisbane where they're going to see
temperatures in the high
30s for three or four days on end and
just really no reprieve during the night
as well so
in that region they certainly do take
care of the heat it's the first big heat
wave of the season
so it can catch people by surprise it is
important to look after yourself and
others around
you during this time indeed jonathan how
many thanks for joining us
thank you well it is time now to take a
look at the markets and wall street has
advanced overnight in a holiday
shortened session the dow jones ended
above well it ended just below
30 000 after eking above that for the
first time ever suggesting the rally
is not faltering for now the nasdaq
outperformed as investors favored tech
rallied stocks that have fared well
during the pandemic
looking to our markets now an australian
shares closed yesterday's session lower
but still finished the week higher
the asx 200 was down half a percent
shares in treasury wines were halted
after china announced tariffs of up to
200 percent on local wines shares in
bigger cheese jumped almost 12
after completing the initial steps in a
200 million
capital raising taking a look now at
commodities and oil is
on track for a fourth weekly advance
boosted by optimism
over the covert 19 vaccine progress
ahead of an opec ministerial
gathering next week gold is trading
lower
looking at the currencies now and the
australian dollar is marginally higher
it's buying 73.87 usc
we're going to stay with the finance
theme and we're now joined by susanna
hatton who
is the managing director of bfg
financial services uh welcome to
the weekend breakfast uh suzanne now
let's
talk about china targeting australian
wine
this is the latest of course in the
tussle beijing's tussle with canberra as
uh
kath said there earlier we saw
australia's treasury wine at halt
trading yesterday after beijing
announced those tariffs of up to
200 percent how badly is this going to
affect australia's wine industry
well when you think about the wine
industry we actually export more wine
than we drink here for australian wines
and china
represents over a third of those exports
and so it's an enormous concern for the
wine industry it
adds to the congo line of other of our
exports that have been hit with these
tariffs
now for treasury wine as you say they
went into a halt
and that's because their share price
yesterday dropped by 11
and so they need to take stock and come
back to the market
on monday and explain what strategies
they're going to use to deal with this
dreadful news
now thinking of treasury wine they're
already down over 50 percent
over the last 12 months but i absolutely
recall
that they have put in place a strategy
and a planning for how they can develop
their other markets away for china and
that's a cautionary tale
for many of our exporters to start
diversifying because it seems to be just
getting worse
it does seem to be that and you
mentioned you described it perfectly you
said a conga line of all these products
that
beijing has decided to target have we
learned our lesson do you think
many australian producers are starting
to look at other markets now
my view is they they are what we're
hearing agms
and that's going to be crucial we
already knew australia relied heavily on
our major
major trading partner being china i
think we just didn't anticipate
the enormous risk in such a short period
of time
so we've learned our lesson and we have
to diversify
across the country and also let's
support our wine industry over this
festive
season and buy australian wine you won't
have any argument from me there
suzanne i want to talk about another
company that made headlines
this week as well telstra will be paying
something like 50 million dollars in
penalty for breaching consumer laws and
they
were found to have sold mobile plans and
products to vulnerable consumers and
this is
the second largest uh penalty in the
history
of australian consumer laws
does it send a strong enough message
though to other telcos and corporations
well i certainly hope so a 50 million
dollar fine which we were
aware of that they provisioned for that
in their financials for 220
and that's got to be ratified by the
federal court of course
the issue here is that disgraceful
behaviour like that has to be called out
and as you say hopefully sends a message
but also we all have to look at what do
they do when they are
caught out and at the very least telstra
has
left those vulnerable people with their
phones wiped the contracts
with good news which is good news for
them
the issue is does the market does the
share market
wipe their shares or reduce their share
price for such poor behavior
and over that week telstra were down up
still
0.65 so a bit lower than the market
the issue with someone like telstra is
their share price is
more going to be affected if they don't
maintain their dividend
because they're a big dividend payer at
over seven percent with franking credits
but i just want to point out they are
paying out 99
of their earnings per share so there's a
big dividend risk there
and does reputational issues like this
affect them as adversely as it should
probably not wow now we want to move on
to
shopping it is of course the shopping
season now we may not have imported
thanksgiving as such from the us but we
have imported the us holiday sales
of this particular period we saw black
friday of course yesterday
retail sales now they're expected to be
bigger
than ever what do you think is behind
that
well there's certainly from an
australian perspective some pent up
demand
we've had as you know job keeper job
seeker
to support cash flow in the economy and
remember this month
we also had the reserve bank dropping
interest rates
and advising their printing money by
buying bonds
and property prices have recovered and
property prices really affect consumer
sentiment
which by the way is up seven percent
which is quite massive
now as far as the shopping goes we've
had a 40
increase in online shopping and
that's been increasing 15 percent a year
so we certainly embrace that over the
lockdown
i think the issue is though when do we
pay full price
and some of the retailers are bemoaning
the fact that if they can't sell
full price at christmas when are they
going to sell because it's not really
just black friday
i got offers much earlier than yesterday
to participate in sales and that could
run up right to christmas
which is a huge concern for the
retailers
it certainly is suzanne we're going to
have to leave it there always great
having your insight here on weekend
breakfast
i have a lovely day to zanhattan there
from bfg finance
let's take a look at the top stories now
on weekend breakfast and temperatures
are set to soar over the weekend
as the heatwave grips much of the
country's southeast
fire bans are in place across several
regions in south australia
and new south wales while reinforcements
are being sent to queensland's fraser
island to help crews contain
an out of control bushfire there two
people have been charged with
manslaughter in relation to the death of
a three-year-old girl in townsville
yesterday
queensland police believe the toddler
died as a result of heat exposure from
being left in a locked car
for most of the day the child's 37 year
old mother
and a 30 year old 30 year old male
acquaintance
are due to appear in court today
iran's top nuclear scientist long
suspected by the west of leading a
secret atomic weapons program
has been assassinated near tehran mohsen
fakhri zadar
reportedly died of injuries in hospital
after armed assassins fired on his car
iran is accusing israel of being
complicit in the attack
with the country's military commander
vowing revenge
and australia heads into tomorrow's
second one day clash
against india full of confidence after a
66-run victory at the scg last night
the australians posted a huge total of 6
for 374 with skipper aaron finch
and batsman steve smith starring with
centuries
well let's take a look now what's making
headlines in the newspapers and
online both here and around the world
but starting here with the sydney
morning herald
the opposition front bencher chris bowen
says labour must do better to embrace
the aspirations of suburban australians
if it has any chance of returning to
government following three successive
federal election losses in the age
victoria's health department has been
forced to release emails previously
withheld from the hotel quarantine
inquiry
that reveal a bitter internal turf war
about who
should have been in charge of the
program on news.com a man and a woman
are due to appear in court today charged
with manslaughter after a three-year-old
girl was found dead in a car
in townsville the guardian has the
headline old bones
new look the australian museum in sydney
will
reopen its doors to the public today
after a 15-month
60 million dollar facelift in the u.s
and the new york times has a story on
amazon's extraordinary hiring spree this
year
the company has added over 400 000
employees in just 10 months
bringing its global workforce to more
than 1.2 million
turning to europe now deutsche weller
reports that germany's coronavirus
partial lockdown will
not be lifted until december 20th
at the earliest and may be extended
until the start
of january back home and wine producers
are
uncertain about their future after
australian wine imports to china were
hit with tariffs ranging
to more than 200 per cent now the
tariffs
take effect today and the federal trade
minister simon birmingham says
the decision will make the chinese
market for many producers
for more let's speak now to tony marr
who's the ceo of the national farmers
federation good morning to you tony
thanks for joining us good morning
thanks for having me
what do you think the motivation is
behind china's
announcement to dump these effective
tariffs on the wine industry
yeah look it's hard to tell it's
obviously been happening for a little
while in terms of the
diplomatic relationship the concerning
part is that
off the back of a few really difficult
seasons not only the wine industry but
other agricultural
producers are now you know facing
uncertainty around what is a really key
market so
what we're hoping is that this can be
sorted as soon as possible we want to
continue to
supply china and other markets with the
excellent
quality food and fiber that australian
farmers produce i mean you've got 10
days to appeal this is it likely though
that there'll be any
uh there'll be any action taken that
will stop this from happening
oh look it's it's really hard to tell at
the moment i mean what we do know is
that
you know things like anti-dumping for
wine and for other products barley
previously
our view is that they're unsubstantiated
i mean china is the
one of the highest value markets for
australian wine so
you know claims that it's being dumped
into the market at a low price
you know we actually have to test those
and provide the evidence that we don't
think that's actually occurring it's a
high value market it's premium ions
going to that product into that market
so you know we'll work with the ministry
of uh
commerce in china and with our
government to make sure that we can sort
this
issue out we we really just do see it
being a disappointing result for chinese
consumers and also for australian
producers here
but you say that chinese drinkers if you
like will be disappointed but that gap
will be filled by other countries won't
it
in chile and and us i mean isn't the
impact of this
of these effective tariffs to a 1.2
billion dollar
industry these tariffs being what
between 100 and 200
just going to make our wines just too
expensive
well it that's the actual impact yes
it'll make them much more expensive than
what they should be
we'd like to think that australian wine
has a particular characteristics and
qualities and flavors and things that
you know are hard to replicate but
you're right there are some serious
competitors out there whether that's
south america
us europe of course so you know it's
really difficult well of course we want
to see
these measures removed so that
australian wine can be competitive on
supermarket shelves in china we've heard
from china's
foreign ministry overnight a spokesman
there said i think the australian side
should reflect
upon its own behaviour should think
about whether they've respected
china's interests speaking about the
government actions there
what more should and could the
government be doing here to get out of
this
uh situation for the wine industry and
how accountable do you hold
them with respect to the diplomacy and
the relations with china
yeah look clearly there's a lot going on
in this relationship and it's been
um you know relationships go through
these patches where uh
countries or partners uh you know raise
concerns and reigns issues what
to answer your question what more can
the australian government be doing
everything everything they possibly can
and we are working with them as
representative organizations
making sure that they've got all the
available information and you know
coming up with strategies to make sure
that we can
move through these challenges china is a
really important market for australian
farmers and we've just got to do
everything we can to make sure
that we can continue to supply into that
market and
of course look at other markets we sell
product all around the world and luckily
australian farm produce food and fibre
is highly regarded so yes we can find
you know other markets and develop other
markets but when we've got a major
market
um raising concerns and raising
challenges we've just simply got to work
through them and come out the other side
and hopefully it's a win-win situation
for chinese consumers and australian
farmers
tony i just want to cover up on two
other issues before we finish up borders
and backpackers
just on the borders we've seen most of
the hard borders bar wa coming down now
for uh farmers i mean we know that there
were travel bubbles and freight
issues that were dealt with long before
this but is this final announcement
uh helped help farmers are they back to
where they were before
yeah look it'll certainly help that was
a major concern with people crossing
borders to pick fruit or harvest grain
and things like that
the real issue that we are facing is
that the planes aren't landing with
backpackers and seasonal workers so
that will continue until planes start
landing in this country so
again much more than what they are at
the moment so yes the borders opening up
is
much needed and much welcomed but we
really do
have to continue to try and work out
with
states and with other countries that
have got low incidences
of covert to get large numbers of
workers to come
in here we've got you know products some
are fruits so whether that's
you know nectarines plums peaches table
table grapes you know these sorts of
things strawberries
um that need to be picked over the
summer period and we are
increasingly looking for workers so it's
a couple of things we can get domestic
workers and we'd love to see
domestic workers who are displaced
looking for jobs come out into rural and
regional australia we think there's a
great opportunity there
but we'll also need and have always
needed
that workforce to be supplemented by
international workers
you've been lobbying the government on
this uh
plan to get the working holiday maker
program
back up and running a core
recommendation of of
that is to focus on two critical sectors
can you just outline the plan of how
you'd like to get
these people back in and how how
important it is to the agriculture
sector
yeah it's critical as as i've said with
labor in agriculture has always
been a real challenge and it's been
exacerbated by copenhagen of course as i
said that planes aren't landing and
people aren't coming here for holidays
so what we'd like to do is focus on
agriculture and also
um care so all pairs that you know come
and look after families
um while they travel and work in
australia
so what we'd like to do is to establish
for those two sectors a pilot program
where people
are paired up with employers and they
are approved and situations and and you
know accommodation is all worked out
before
they arrive they're located in regions
and quarantined and isolated we want to
protect the health of
not only themselves but also the rural
communities and then we can expand it
out into other sectors so
there's a staged process but we've just
got to
work out managing the new norm and this
our proposal with
the the youth hostel workers backpackers
association is to actually make sure
that that happens so they're
complementary sectors backpackers travel
around the country and
spend some money and earn earn money on
farms
so we teamed up with them and we've been
talking with the government about that
process
with 80 cent of workers in the
horticultural sector being backpackers
during those peak labor periods you know
very much impacting on cotton grain and
dairy sectors um it's an interesting
plan which we'll keep an eye on tony
marr
for now that's all we have time for but
thank you for joining us today
thanks for having me well we may not yet
be able to travel overseas due to the
pandemic but that's not going to stop us
from immersing ourselves in japanese
culture
from the comfort of our own homes this
year the annual japanese film festival
is taking itself online offering viewers
the chance to watch more than 25
films for free from december 4th right
through to the 13th you will have access
to some of the best of japanese cinema
including feature-length films
documentaries and animes all online and
at no
travel expense of course now and lee is
the
jff festival programmer and she joins us
now
thank you so much for taking the time to
speak with us and breakfast and
so just explain to us what prompted this
decision to offer
this film festival amazing film festival
online and for free yeah sure so the
japanese film festival has been running
annually
in major cities in australia for the
past 24 years
it's put on by the japan foundation
sydney which is a non-profit
organization
founded by the japanese government to
bring japanese culture and language to
countries around the world
so unfortunately this year we weren't
able to hold the festival locally in
cinemas
due to coven 19 but thanks to our
headquarters we
actually were able to work out with
japanese distributors to bring the
festival online
it's going to be in 20 countries around
the world including australia and new
zealand so we think this is a really
lovely way
to bring people together during a kind
of difficult year and celebrate japanese
cinema
and of course since we can't offer the
usual cinema experience we're going to
be bringing back some past
festival favorites some new films for
and it's all going to be free the thing
though and that i love about going to
film festivals is going there with other
people who are there to watch these
films
you know it's a unique culture it's it's
a unique activity as well and being
there with other people who are
uh cinephiles as well it's fantastic
just to be there don't you think that
watching it from
the comfort of your own home would rob
people of that experience
uh yeah of course going to the cinema
can't really be matched but
luckily since it is free and available
to anyone in australia in new zealand i
think that everyone can come together
through the love of japanese cinema
and to kick off the film festival this
year on friday december
4th at 6 00 p.m we're encouraging
everyone to do an
online watch party of one of our first
films
progre project dreams how to build a
majin jersey's
hanger so if you watch this film along
with us that friday at 6 p.m
and use the hashtag jffa you 2020 and
social media and post your thoughts
we can all have a big watch party
together and you'll have a chance to win
one of our jff t-shirts and some fun
goodies it sounds fun
so all right so no tickets required how
does one actually log on and be able to
get access free access to over 25 films
yeah sure so you go to
japanesefilmfestival.net that's our
australian portal and you can click on
the
plus button and that will take you to
our international site where you'll see
the full film lineup as well as the
streaming schedule
there you can sign up using your email
address for a free account and then
you'll be ready to watch
starting this friday when the festival
kicks off yeah
um it's it's a range of films one of my
favorites that you're going to be
offering of course
is lady michael now we know that this is
a comedy musical
about a young girl training to become a
geisha i loved this movie when i first
watched it as well you're offering it
yeah this is one of our previous jff
films it was from jff 2014 so a little
while ago
it's a musical as you mentioned a very
lovely film about a young woman who
wants to become a geisha
so she goes to kyoto to train as a
michael
or an apprentice geisha and there aren't
many musicals coming out from japan so
it's really interesting to see
how they take on the musical genre and
make it their own and it's a really
great film since we can't travel right
now you can see some lovely scenes of
kyoto
see the gorgeous geisha costuming and
japanese scenery so it's a really lovely
film
all right so apart from lady micah what
should what else should i be watching
out for
well if you like musical we have another
musical dance with me which is from jff
2019 so it was in last year's festival
and this is a super fun musical comedy
about a working woman who's cursed to
sing and dance whenever she hears music
so she has a really important meaning
coming up and she doesn't want to
embarrass herself in front of her boss
who she has a big crush on
so she's in turn determined to go find a
way to lift the curse before the meeting
so this is a lot of fun and we think
you'll be seeing and dancing in your
seat when you have a watch
yeah i can definitely relate to that i
always feel like i need to break out
into song and dance
this is a very important meeting there
are also
several important documentaries as well
um that you're offering one of my
favorite of course is the one on tokyo's
iconic
tsukiji fish market which of course has
moved now
yes that's right so this film
documentary is called skiji wonderland
it's about one of the largest seafood
markets in the world skiji fish market
and as you mentioned this market
actually moved to a new location in
tokyo
a couple years ago and as a very
historic site it was a bit controversial
when this move happened so this
documentary
actually captures the market before it
was moved so you can see this historic
site
and it shows the market through the
lives of the professionals who work
there
showing how it really became a center of
fish culinary culture in japan and help
japanese food culture to flourish
so if there are any foodies out there
this is a great film for them
and i'm going to put you on the spot
here we know that last year parasite was
a huge breakout film
out of korea of course would you
in all of the history of japanese cinema
and there are some
amazing films coming out of japan as
well would you be able to pick a title
that you would say would rival
parasite on an international level
oh yeah that's a tough one i think at
least in terms
of films that have really had an
international impact like parasite we're
going back a little bit but akira
kurosawa films like seven samurai
and all of his repertoire have really
been influential brought japanese cinema
to an international audience even
influenced a series such as star wars
things like that so
you're really seeing a lasting impact
from his works in international cinema
i am so looking forward to this festival
uh thank you so much for
speaking to us uh today and thank you so
much for
putting this film festival online and
for free thank you
can't wait to see the musical one what a
curse it's amazing i know
i know you share that curse well i feel
like i've been living with it with you
she does break into song events quite
often and inappropriately
but someone who's never inappropriate is
louise ransom and she joins us now
to talk more sport and lou the water
polo players must be
very excited because they're about to
jump back in the pool for competition
yeah that's right kath what a year 2020
has been for so many athletes and
it's not going to be water polo as you
know it though rather a beach polo
format
which is considered water polo's version
of t20 if you like
and one of our tokyo olympic hopefuls
brodie halligan joins us live this
morning rodney
good morning to you tell me what is this
new format all about
good morning lawyers the new format is
a kind of fast-paced shorter version of
water polo
it uh like i guess it rivals kind of t20
qriket to our regular test match cricket
it's much shorter
a 15-meter pool only four people in the
water and um
it's a lot of fun and a lot of goals are
scored so it's um great viewing
have the players uh the athletes played
this format before or is this brand new
for everyone
a few of us have played a few test
series games here and there
for fun usually it's played in the bays
or in the on the beaches
hence the name beach water polo so a few
have played i've actually never played
so tonight's going to be my first time
trialling this water polo
it was debuted in world champs last year
in south korea in 2019
so it's an exciting new up up and coming
version of the sport
and it's mixed teams as well tell me how
is that going to go
yeah so we're playing a mixed teams
event um this evening and
a lot of beach water players run as
mixed teams uh it's gonna be a lot of
fun i've never really played with the
boys we train alongside them and
different pool venues and we get to um
you know see them around and we're good
friends and good mates and
you know we uh we always discuss our
careers as athletes and just doing the
same sport well we've never actually
probably played together
so it's going to be a lot um a lot of
fun you know the boys are a lot
physically faster and stronger and
fitter but i i would say that the girls
kind of bring
the skill to the water and kind of
finesse so we'll see how it goes i like
it
now for those that don't know when you
play water polo you're not just wearing
one pair of togs are
you got a couple of layers of togs going
on are you gonna have to put an extra
layer on when you're playing mixed
tonight um i
hope not uh we usually wear one really
tight suit
um and then if that rips you know uh
you've got to go put another one on i
guess so
the boys they don't have a lot of suits
so they don't get grabbed a lot so i
don't think they'll be using that to
their advantage whereas we
um as female players have a lot of cosy
and suit to grab so i guess we'll be
trying to figure out another way to get
around the boys
and there's some decent sporting
pedigree going around uh water polo
in australia yourself included tell me
all about that
yeah so i we have currently three
players in our national team circuit
that
um have dads that played rugby we got um
blocker roach
aj's dad um